General Instructions:
Read the following instructions very carefully and strictly follow them :
(i) This	question	paper	contains	12	questions.	All	questions	are compulsory.
(ii) This question paper is divided into three sections - Section A, B,
andC.
(iii) Section A - Questions no. 1 to 3 are of 2 marks each.
(iv) Section B - Questions no. 4 to 11 are of 3 marks each.
(v) Section C -	Question no. 12 is a Case Study-Based Question of
5 marks.
(vi) There is no overall choice in the question paper. However, internal choice has been provided in some of the questions. Attempt any one of the alternatives in such questions.
(vii) Use of log tables is permitted, if necessary, but use of calculator is
not permitted.
C = 3 X 108 m/s
h = 6-63 x 10-34 Js
e = 1-6 x 10-19 C
µ0 = 4n x 10-7 Tm A-1
Eo = 8-854 x 10-12 C2 N-1 m-2
1	= 9 x 109 N m2 c-2
4rrn0
Mass of electron (m8) = 9-1 x 10-31 kg Mass of neutron= 1-675 x 10-27 kg Mass of proton = 1-673 x 10-27 kg
Avogadro's number = 6-023 x 1023 per gram mole
Boltzmann constant= 1-38 x 10-23 JK-1

SECTION A
1. Distinguish	between	the	intrinsic	semiconductor	and	the extrinsic semiconductor.					2
2. (a)	Briefly	explain	how	energy	is	released	due	to proton-proton cycle in the interior of the Sun.			2
OR
(b) How is the photoelectric current affected with
(i) the	increase	of	the	intensity	of	the	incident radiation, keeping its frequency same?
(ii) the	decrease	of	the	frequency	of	the	incident radiation, keeping its intensity same?
Justify your answer.	2
3. Differentiate between drift current and diffusion current in a p-n junction diode. What is the net current at the p-n junction
in equilibrium ?	2
SECTIONB
4. (a)	Define the term 'distance of closest approach'.
(b) An alpha particle approaches a nucleus with Z = 79. If its distance	of closest	approach	is	28·8 fm,	calculate	the kinetic energy of the particle.					3
5. Explain the working of a light emitting diode. Write its two advantages over conventional incandescent low power bulbs.	3
6. (a)	Prove that different nuclei have the same density.
(b) Find	the	radius	of a	nucleus	with	mass	number	64.
(R0 = 1·2 fm)	3

7. (a)
(b)


55/B/6


Define the term 'Power of a lens' and mention its SI unit.
A diverging lens is made of a material of refractive index 1·6. The radii of curvature of its  two surfaces are 10 cm
and 30 cm. Calculate its power.	3
Page 5	P.T.0.

8. (a)	(i)	Both the objective and	the	eyepiece of a compound microscope have short focal lengths. Explain.
(ii)		Two	convex		lenses		of	focal	lengths		1·25		cm	and 5·0 cm are		used to design a compound		microscope with		an	angular	magnification	of	30.		Find		the required tube length of the	microscope for the final image to form at infinity.												3
OR
(b)  (i)  How will the interference pattern in Young's double slit experiment be affected if the monochromatic source is replaced by a source of white light?
(ii)		In Young's double slit experiment, the two slits are 0·18 mm apart and the screen is placed 1·4 m away from the	plane of slits. If the	distance between the central	bright	fringe	and	the		third	bright	fringe is 1·4 cm, then calculate the wavelength of light used.	3
9. (a)	Write	two	differences	between	matter	waves	and electromagnetic waves.
(b) Find the ratio of de	Broglie wavelengths associated with deuterium	and	tritium	if	both	have	the	same	kinetic energies.										3
10. (a) For an equilateral triangular prism, the angle of minimum deviation is 30°. Find the refractive index of the material of the prism.
(b) The	angle	of	minimum	deviation	for	a	prism	is	found to be equal to the angle of the	prism (A). Show that the refractive index of the material of the prism, µ = 2 cos (  ).		3
11. (a)	Name the electromagnetic waves which are
(i) produced during decay of a nucleus,
(ii) also known as heat waves,
(iii) absorbed by ozone layer in the atmosphere.
Write one use each of these electromagnetic waves.	3
OR

(b) For diffraction due to a single slit :
(i) Briefly explain the conditions for observing maximum and minimum intensity at a point on the screen.
(ii) Why does the intensity of maxima in the diffraction pattern	decrease	sharply	as	their	order (n) increases?					3
SECTIONC

12. The principle of superposition is an important principle in Physics. It helps us to understand many phenomena, for example interference of sound and light waves. According to this principle, the resultant displacement produced at a point, by a number of waves, is the vector sum of the displacements produced by each of the waves. Two light waves, originating from two coherent sources produce a stable interference, due to superposition. Thomas Young in 1801, used an innovative technique to obtain two coherent sources and observed interference of light waves coming from them, on a screen suitably placed away from the plane of the sources. The pattern consists of alternate bright and dark fringes.
(a) Two waves superimpose to produce stable interference. The waves must have :
(i) same amplitudes and varying phase difference.
(ii) different amplitudes and varying phase difference.
(iii) different wavelengths and constant phase difference.
(iv) same wavelengths and constant phase difference.


(b) Light	added	to	light	can	produce	darkness.	This phenomenon is known as :

(i) Dispersion
(iii)	Interference
(ii) 
Scattering
(iv)	Polarization


(c) Two waves of intensity 10 each, superimpose and produce
interference	pattern.	If	the	phase	difference	between

them at a point is  (3
2
the point will be:
(i)	
(iii) 210

),   then the resultant intensity at

(ii)	
(iv) 410


(d) In Young's double slit experiment, with light of wavelength A, the slit separation d = nA. If the distance of the screen from. the plane of the slits D = n3A, then the fringe width will be:
(i) A	(ii)	"A
n2	n
(iii)	nA	(iv)	n2A
(e) In	Young's	double	slit	experiment,	the	source	used produces lights of wavelengths 450 nm. and		600	nm.. On
the	screen, the third maxim.urn. corresponding to 600 nm. coincides	with	nth	maxim.a	corresponding	to	450	nm.,
where n equals :

(i)	1
(iii)	3

(ii)	2
(iv)	4	5x1=5




















